An African Election- Ghana’s Democracy in Action by Kaori Southall 




An African Election- Ghana’s Democracy in Action is a striking political documentary directed by Jarreth Merz that details the 2008 presidential election process in Ghana. The documentary offers an in-depth view into the electoral process, one which highlights the challenge that is the democratic process, especially against the backdrop of common ideology that democracy is a challenge in Africa. It is evident that the democratic process is being tested as the prospect of democracy is discussed as a fundamental and much-needed concept to change Ghana’s problematic history characterized by contests over power that strongly undermine the tenets of democracy. Merz’s documentary gives an inner look into the electoral process, including the political, economic and social factors that influence and shape the process. The documentary charts the contours of political discourse, showing partisan ideologies between the two dominant parties in the election and among Ghanaian citizens, who are distinctly divided in their support for the two parties. An important feature of the campaigns is how the presidential candidates communicate their political agenda that details their plans once elected. The candidates are full of promises which include substantive measures that they will implement towards development once elected. This review analyzes the unfolding of Ghana’s 2008 election as depicted in the film and uses Amartya Sens’ Human Development Theory, which emphasizes that successful development puts humans at the center of its concerns, to analyze political freedom as development, with respect to the Ghanaian 2008 election. 


Merz’s documentary features an inside look into the Ghana’s 2008 election in which he details the presidential campaign process involving two dominant parties and presidential candidates, Nana Akufo Addo of the National People’s Party’s (NPP) and John Atta Mills of the National Democratic Congress (NDC) (Merz, 2011). While there are other candidates vying in the election, it is clear from a BBC commentary in the film that the election is a two-party race. The documentary details the election process from the final days of campaigning up to the time the elected president is inaugurated (Merz, 2011). It is a tumultuous process that involves a series of activities required by the democratic process. There is apparent indication it is a difficult and flawed process, evident in the utterances from the candidates and citizens and the ensuing difficulty to establish a clear winner. The documentary begins during the campaigning period where documentary follows the two main candidates, Nana Akufo Addo and John Atta Mills as they campaign in different parts of Ghana (Merz, 2011). An apparent feature of the election is that it is highly competitive, evident in the manner in which the two dominant parties are able to mobilize supporters during the campaigns. The candidates travel in convoys to different campaign spots where they are accompanied or received by their supporters donning party insignia, after which they proceed to communicate their political agenda (Merz, 2011). It is apparent that the election is important to the people. Even more pertinent is the message that the presidential candidates communicate to their supporters. 


The tenets of democracy are premised on the freedom of participation that allows free play of ideology, interests and choice. As the title of the film suggests, Ghana’s electoral process shows democracy in action. It is apparent that there is a need and desire to espouse democracy, both from the candidates and the people of Ghana. One key figure in the documentary is Jerry John Rawlings, a former Ghanaian military leader, who is seen campaigning for presidential candidate Atta Mills, and who has complicated past as Ghana’s leader. Rawlings served as Ghana’s leader under military rule and his tenure as leader is frequently associated with political violence and dictatorship. In the film, he is seen detailing Ghana’s problems with democracy and is seen championing a fair electoral process. He frequently urges the people to protect their vote as if they are protecting their mother or family members (Merz, 2011). Similarly, the candidates urge the people to show up during election day to cast their votes, which they emphasize are instrumental to facilitating change in Ghana, which will be driven by them when elected. Each of the candidates’ campaign manifesto features developmental plans that they hope to achieve while in power, featuring promises to modernize agriculture, technological advancement, expansion of education opportunities, economic growth and empowerment, etc. (Merz, 2011). 


Change is a fundamental aspiration in this election, both political and developmental change. The typical trope in African politics frequently features weak political cultures that are characterized by lack of democratic values, incumbency (reluctance to effect regime change or dictatorships) and the potential of military intervention. However, in this particular election, although flawed, participation in the electoral process is encouraged and perceived a driver towards future change. Amartya Sen’s Human Development theory includes political freedom as one of the substantive freedoms necessary to facilitate development. Most importantly, Sen’s theory emphasizes human development, which is attainable through “the process of expanding the real freedoms that people enjoy” (Sen, 1999). In particular, political freedom refers to the opportunities available to people that accords them the power of political expression and social participation in choosing those who should govern and the principles on which they govern. Also, this include the ability to offer criticisms and scrutiny on matters related to the politics such as questioning systems of governance or policy implementation. The essence of democracy is to secure the political freedoms of a nation’s people, and according to Sen, democracy, therefore, serves a pre-eminent role in facilitating human development (Sen, 1999). 


Ghana’s 2008 election embodies the tenets of democracy, in that the political and social atmosphere of the country as depicted in the film encourages the citizenry to engage in a political process whose ensuing outcomes plays a critical role in enhancing their lives. As Sen details, political freedom plays a constructive role in bringing about human development (Sen, 1999). The film features a vigilant citizenry who, although divided along partisan lines, are aware and eager to embrace their political freedoms. True enough, on the day of election, the people show up in large numbers to vote for their preferred candidates. Some people queue to cast their ballots as early as the crack of down, and in some voting stations, voting goes on past the allocated time due to the large numbers. Even during the counting of votes, Ghanaian people are present in helping and witnessing the counting, mostly in a bid to prevent stealing of votes (Merz, 2011). 


Despite the embodiment of democracy in allowing the voters the chance to choose their leader, Ghana’s 2008 elections was a flawed process as depicted in Merz’s documentary. Prior to the actual day of voting, claims of election rigging were already prevalent, with each of the main contesting parties claiming their rivals had plans to steal votes. For instance, the documentary shows J.J Rawlings in a meeting with an election monitoring delegation where he points out that their rivals are determined on taking winning the election by force and violence and that there is a possibility that the aftermath could be detrimental to the people of Ghana and the political atmosphere (Merz, 2011). These claims are backed when the film features reports that some “muscle men” have been identified at certain polling stations, and whose role is to intimidate voters, perhaps not to vote or vote a certain way (Merz, 2011). This is one of the many instances in the film that points to the flawed democratic process of that particular election. Similarly, the NDC party express concern over the presence of NPP agents at a polling station, who they claim have the intention to steal ballot boxes. The NPP party maintained that the supposed “muscle men” that the NDC party perceived threatening were their voting agents from another region who had been denied accreditation, and for this reason remained stationed outside the polling station in question (Merz, 2011). From the film, it is difficult to determine which of the two parties is more responsible for jeopardizing the electoral process. It is clear that the reasons for the flawed process are endemic corruption and the normalization of illiberal practices that characterizes Ghana’s political culture. For instance, the winner take-all politics can be detected from the candidates’ political agenda, which, in turn, promotes illiberal practices like political vigilantism, monetizing politics, voting fraud, violence and selective justice. This is evident in the assertions that both parties concerning the possibility of voter fraud and violence even before the election happens. The underlying assumption here is that, perhaps, such plans may have been in place. Evidently, the illiberal practices that characterizes Ghana’s politics are incompatible with democratic principles and ideals, and for this reason, the election process was significantly flawed even though in the end a concession was reached and one winner determined. 


In examining the nature of Ghana’s democracy during the 2008 presidential election, it is imperative to look at Ghana’s democratic history, focusing on the institutional and cultural discourse. Central to discourse on the democracy of post-colonial countries like Ghana, is the question on the role of colonial rule in effecting the nature of democracy that post-colonial countries. Different scholars have debated whether colonial rule had positive or negative impacts on the kind of democracy post-colonial countries have. Lee and Paine (2016) detail contrasting views on the impact that British colonial rule had on post-colonial democracy in its colonial subjects. Britain promoted bureaucratic mechanisms and structures that promoted democratic norms and which ensured its colonial subjects gained experience with rule of law and not arbitrary authority. Notably, most of the colonial subjects had an enhanced demand to embrace democracy at independence (Lee & Paine, 2016). However, a common theme among post-colonial African countries like Ghana is that the democratic systems and process in place at independence have been undermined over time. For instance, prior to Ghana’s 2008 election, Ghana had experienced failed democracy coupled with military governments under J.J. Rawlings. Lee and Paine (2016) attribute these democracy reversals to the lack of structural and cultural factors to sustain democracy in post-colonial countries after independence. For instance, structural factors would include a credible and reliable election governing body, which Ghana clearly lacked during the 2008 election. Illiberal cultural factors such as corruption and voter fraud are some of the factors that undermine democracy. 


Another central goal of political freedom according to Sen’s theory is the ability to hold governments accountable by putting pressure on them that demands appropriate action (Sen, 1999). After the election process, this involves holding the elected leader accountable for the promises they made while campaigning for votes. In the feature, it is unclear whether this is possible, especially in a young democracy like Ghana. In one of the interviews where Merz interviews a farmer on his opinions of the electoral process, he details that his wish is that the candidates could stop telling lies (Merz, 2011). A well-known political tradition in elections is that most candidates do not always deliver the promises in their campaign manifestos, and in a young democracy like Ghana, it is fundamentally difficult to hold leaders accountable. 


Overall, the idea of human development was narrowly perceived in relation to Ghana’s 2008 presidential elections. Participative political freedom is guaranteed and that is where it ends. Participation in the election process remains broad, but other forms of political freedom are very narrowly construed as it seems like beyond the election, the people will be passive recipients of the developmental plans that their preferred candidates proposed, that is, if they ever come to fruition. It is quite commendable that the election ends with an established winner, even though the process is distinctly flawed. 
 


References


Lee, A., & Paine, J. (2016). Did British Colonialism Promote Democracy? Divergent Inheritances and Diminishing Legacies. Working paper under review.


Merz, J. (2011). An African Election- Ghana’s Democracy in Action. Hybrid Entertainment. https://wm.kanopy.com/video/african-election


Sen, A. (1999). Development as freedom. Paperback.
