# Arguments from Articles 


The articles by Kitchin and Anderson discuss the changes that have been advanced using big data. 

Kitchin discusses the new types of empiricism and the declaration of the "end of theory" through the utilization and adoption of data-driven approaches in science and the advancement of digital humanities and computational social sciences that promote the radically diverse techniques in making sense of the culture, history, economy, and society. The scholar argues that the use of data-driven approaches is consistent with the tenets of scientific approaches and simultaneously ensures the openness in the use of the hybrid combination of inductive and deductive approaches to augment the understanding of the phenomenon. The utilization of big data is made possible by the data analytic tools that help understand the data and interpret the information. According to the articles, the data science adoption shall be the end of theoretical epistemologies in research.

The articles by Anderson echoes Kitchin assertions as it claims that the emergence and use of big data is the end of theory. The author adds that the data deluge makes scientific approaches obsolete as the big data can be used to map patterns and relationships about a phenomenon. The existence of petabytes of information allows for analysis and interpretation of various variables without relying on hypotheses or theories. The interpretation allows scholars and researchers to map casualty, correlations without necessarily relying on theory or scientific hypotheses. Such models ultimately make the use of theories and scientific techniques redundant as the information can be analyzed to determine the casualty between various phenomena.  Thus the main argument by both Anderson echoes Kitchin 1that the emergence and use of big data is the end of theories.
