  In the article published in the Wired magazine, the author claims that the emergence of big data signifies the end of theory. In the provocative article, the author argues that the data deluge makes scientific approaches obsolete. The article implies that Big data patterns and relationships are likely to produce meaningful and insightful knowledge relating to complex phenomena. The article adds that the death of theory occurs due to the existence of petabytes of data that allow for data analysis without worrying about theories or hypotheses as the data can be subjected to analysis using different computing techniques and data analytic approaches were previously underdeveloped. The use of the big data shall not only ensure that that correlation approaches, causation relations, and other scientific approaches can be advanced even with the lack of coherent models that are unified by theories showing a shift from the traditional ways to a more fluid approach.

  Besides, the article's premise is that scholars in science and academia no longer rely on making educated guesses, construct hypotheses and models, and test them using data and experiments. Rather, such activities can be accomplished through the data mining process, where big data can be evaluated to reveal effects and reach scientific conclusions without any experimentation techniques. The big data approach to data management allows the data analyst to accurately get the full resolution on worldwide affairs as the data is coherent when looking closely at a particular section of data; besides, the analysts do not need to develop theories or come up with hypotheses.
  
  The author further illustrates his claims using the tech giant's founding philosophy that is founded on using statistics on data traffics to make improvements in various pages. The author asserts that the process does not need any theory or hypothesis to determine the causal relationship. Instead they depend on the statistics that are generated by the search engine. This has also enabled the company to create advertising content that targets a particular demographic. The author further quotes Peter Norvig, Google's research director, who argued that "All models are wrong, and increasingly you can succeed without them.” The assertion of the confirms that in the contemporary world that enjoys a significant amount of data, relationships can easily be established without necessarily depending on theories or models that were the premise of the traditional approaches to research. In summation, with the current emergence of the big data and its utilization, as demonstrated in the advertisement, it is evident that the use of theories in research will not be necessary.
