Question 1: Owen defines development as the combination of political, social, legal and economic systems that together are able to provide the citizens with decent and fulfilling lives. By this, he deviates from the norm when he develops the argument that development does not only mean increase in people/ firm’s disposable incomes. He gives the analogy of his association with a young girl in a remote farming Ethiopian village. Owen asked what the girl wanted to be when she grew up. She said she wanted to become a doctor. The implication is the analogy goes hand in hand with Nobel Prize winning Economist Amartya Sen’s assertion that development cannot be solely judged by the amount of incomes that people earn on average, but on whether it gives people the power to exercise their choices and abilities freely. 

Question 2: Thomas Thwaites was a British Designer who tried to assemble a toaster from scratch, with no prior experience. He was not content with just using the toaster. He assembled all the materials he thought were needed but failed in his attempt. The significance of this attempt is important study of development and the complexity theory is that development is a product of the existence of several chains along the way, at different levels that give rise to the final product. Just like the simple components of the toaster, there is no single big push that is going to generate a monumental impact on development. It must be simple steps at a time.

Question 3: The comparison of the growth of South Korea and Ghana is illustrated by Owen Barder to give relevance to economic models used in development. South Korea had lower income per person in 1960 but experienced tsunamic growth from 1970s while Ghana stagnated. He uses this to indicate that development is about firms being more productive and gradually increasing people’s income and thereby expanding their choices and capabilities. In resisting fatalism, Owen Barder argues that development is not a pure Darwinian theory and development elsewhere cannot be thought to be copied elsewhere.

Question 4: The Harrod Domar model attempts to explain development in terms of the level of saving and capital. That there is no reason for a country to have a balanced development in its regions. The model assumes that every country has full employment level of disposable income and that there is minimal to no government interference in the functioning of the economy.

Question 5: The Robert Solow model was developed in response to the apparent limitations of the Harrod-Domar model. In Solow’s Model, he postulated that the main factor in development was technological advancement. It’s a non-linear, mathematics heavy model that explains the evolution of capital accumulation, labour and population growth.

Question 6: The Robert Solow model argued that it is possible for countries to experience complete and steady growth for years. He says that this can happen with continued technological advancements in these countries. For developing or poor countries, the possibility of growth is higher as the country increases its savings, and investments to use them as capital to increase business and opportunities for people to push the economy forward. With enough capital, labour, and the right technology, countries can succeed in economic growth.

Question 7: The Ajaukota Steel Works Company was a government sponsored steel milling company by the Nigerian government to prospect and developed ore products. It was the largest in Nigeria built on 24,000 hectares. The project has been highly unsuccessful leading to abandonment of three quarter of the works due to government mismanagement.

Question 8: In advancing the theories around development, Owen does home in on once Ethiopian leader Haile whose rein censored musical creativity and its impact on development. Kapuscinski’s book the Emperor is significant in unveiling the aristocratic government built by Haile Selassie. It shows the uprisings that may result from people’s damage of dignity and respect by governments. The suppression of systemic emergent change had a negative impact on development, especially in relation to the all-round theorization of development. I agree with this postulation because development must include the freedom to choices that we make every day. 

Question 9: Steve Jones was a former employee at Unilever who had a problem with industrial nozzles that didn’t work properly, leading to loss of time and declining quality products. The biologist and his team carried out 449 tests to determine the best nozzle. The significance of this is embracing failure, learning, and improvising to overcome our challenges.

Question 10: Schumpeter’s gale, or creative destruction is the woks of Australian Joseph Schumpeter who derived it from Karl Max theories and popularized it. The theory states that industrial mutation/ change is what revolutionaries’ structures in an economy in an organic manner, such that a new on is essentially created from the old one without major structural changes.it also argues that capitalism annihilates or changes the core structure of economic orders, giving rise to new ones. Wealth must also be devalued through organic or regular changes such as a war, crises or abandonment. This way, it gives rise to creation of new wealth. The dismantling of established procedures makes way for innovations and improvements and is therefore a positive change. In the current world, technological advancement can be described as being disruptive and therefore a relevant application of the theory.

Question 11: Owen Barder recommends the resistance of engineering as a means for policy implication. He argues that engineering should be resisted due to the changes occurring in design with continued evolution. He resists this practice, especially, in developing countries, which often adopt isomorphic mimicry. He explains isomorphic mimicry as the practice of developing countries adopting strategies of development used by already developed countries, which have no eventuality due to lack of drivers for these policies. Instead, he argues that the developing countries should embrace their own innovations through experimenting on different things to drive their development.

Question 12: Owen used the phrase “resist fatalism” to argue that development is not a pure Darwinian theory and development elsewhere cannot be thought to be copied elsewhere. He uses this to indicate that development is about firms being more productive and gradually increasing people’s income and thereby expanding their choices and capabilities.
Norman Borlaug is considered to be the father of the green revolution. His work is believed to have saved billions of people since his research led to the breeding of wheat, rice, among other crops, which would eventually lead to food self-sufficiency in developing countries.

