# **How Can We Do to Prevent Childhood Trauma as a Public Health Issue Data Scientifically?**


Adverse Childhood Experiences (ACEs) pose as a major challenge in many public health sectors. From the Ted Talk by Dr. Nadine Burke, A lot of kids were being referred for ADHD, Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder (Ted, 2014). Some of the later findings, exposing children to abuse, neglect and family dysfunctions not only does it affect the healthy emotional, physical and behavioral development but also contributes to morbidity in adulthood. Childhood adversity has been linked to health related complications like obesity, liver diseases, cancer, skeletal fractures and heart diseases (Burke et al., 2011). The effect of ACEs in the development and controlling of type 1 and type 2 diabetes mellitus has rarely been considered in many researches. The Biological Embedding of Childhood Adversity Model (BECAM) provides a clear explanation for this phenomenon. BECAM posits that childhood stress that arise from poverty or maltreatment causes cytokine response to challenge as well as reduce sensitivity in hormonal signals hence leading to problematic behaviors like living unhealthy lifestyles. These factors, when joined with other traumatic exposures are deemed to provoke chronic diseases in adulthood. The central research question is to identify the correlation between child traumatic events and chronic conditions later in life.

Adverse traumatic events in the early life have the potential of affecting the future life of the child adversely. Adverse Childhood Experiences like abuse, community and family violence, and neglect pose as significant health challenge in the United States. It is evident that 30-40% of youths who are exposed to family violence have a tendency of developing posttraumatic experiences like nightmares, flashbacks, intrusive thoughts and physiological hyper-arousal like insomnia. These symptoms affect behavioral, emotional and academic development of a child. The physiological impacts associated with ACEs not only does it affect the mental health of the child, but has been seen to correlate with other medical conditions. The systems, environment, agents and network have impact in the human development. System of care that considers and punishes any form of child abuse has reduced incidences of childhood trauma. As well, the environment that nurtures respect for life and child right protection has reduced incidences of adverse childhood experiences. This is because any childhood trauma is punished through established laws in the system. Presence of the agents and network to children protective services has led to reduction in the ACEs as the rights of the children are advocated through child right agencies and networks.
Children protective institutions have emerged in order to help reduce child abuse. These institutions are tasked to investigate any case of child abuse or maltreatment with the core purpose of ensuring children does not suffer in the early life. Childhood presents as an essential stage of life for development. Therefore, appropriate care should be given during the childhood stage for children to grow and function effectively. Childhood trauma breaks strong foundation in childhood which leads to future health conditions and social inabilities. The childhood protective institutions and agencies ensure that children are exposed to less childhood trauma to promote healthy human development. Social services work hand in hand with law enforcement to assist in investigating as well as reporting childhood trauma. Social service investigates the living condition of the child to determine if it’s a safe environment that fosters healthy growth to reduce future effects of ACEs. Both urban and rural areas have incidences of the ACEs. However, rural have higher incidences given that parents and guardians have poor living condition and reduced know-how on effective nurturing of children. Therefore, any attempt to prevent ACEs should target to empower everyone in rural and urban to avoid childhood trauma as well as establish accessible institutions that prevent ACEs. 

This research provides with the possible ways in which childhood trauma can be prevented. Childhood trauma is a public health issue since it has the potential of resulting in undesired consequences. Therefore, the prevention of childhood trauma will not only result in reduction of the number of children affected, it will as well result in the improvement of the health status of these children. As highlighted, childhood trauma is associated with both physical and metal complication, an attempt to prevent childhood trauma will help reduce potential health risks to children as they grow up. The prevention of childhood trauma will result in reduction of the incidences of type II diabetes, as well as other mental and social complication due to childhood trauma. This reduces the burden on the healthcare system and saves a lot of revenue to the government and the facilities. Therefore, through the research, possible prevention approach may result in improving the overall health status of the children and adults.


## **Reference**

TED. (2014). *Nadine Burke Harris: How childhood trauma affects health across a lifetime* [Video file]. Retrieved 15 November 2020 from https://www.ted.com/talks/nadine_burke_harris_how_childhood_trauma_affects_health_across_a_lifetime.


Burke, N. J., Hellman, J. L., Scott, B. G., Weems, C. F., & Carrion, V. G. (2011). The impact of adverse childhood experiences on an urban pediatric population. Child abuse & neglect, 35(6), 408-413.
